# Date Models

- statechart definition
- statechart running
- chat session
  - messages (system, user, llm, tool calls, etc.)
  - message (createdAt, etc.)

# Statecharts

Dynamic in nature. An atomic state may become compound/parallel because of something that happened in its action.

- atomic
- compound: state is active and at most one sub-state is active (special case of atomic)
- parallel: state is active and at most one sub-state per region is active (special case of compound)

All state change ops are synchronous on atomic and compound states. Parallel states exist in go-routines, with event input/output channels for appropriate signalling.

Event evaluation order is only guaranteed for synchronous operations. All other event evals are 'eventually' guaranteed.

Actions have access to runtime context (statechart specific data-bag, read-only), and application context (user specific data-bag, read-write), and initiating event.

Guards have access to runtime application context as read-only, and initiating event.

States have actions onEnter, onExit. Transitions have to state, from state, action, guard, and triggering event; only one event per transition.

# System Services

Just specialized statecharts that handle application level stuff like chart life-cycle, timers, long-running tasks, etc.

# Agent Chart Specification

Agents are defined in YAML, in terms of statecharts. Here, we want to use 'state' in a statechart to signify modes of reasoning. We might encode an OODA loop, or some other responsive loop. An active agent might specify development activities in terms of a chart, where the chart exiting is gated by passing tests, or by maximum number of times through a loop to prevent run-away operations, etc., or may encode R&D activities as two states with many possible sub-states.

The _goal_ is to provide a tightly controlled, but versatile agent reasoning pipeline specification that can be dialed in for specific, well-defined, activities.

# Agent data-bag

Agents are defined by charts, charts have access to the application-context data-bag, and within the data-bag, there is a chart instance scoped section specifically for agent session context.

The session context is an ordered list of 'messages' from any source. These could include system prompts, user messages, agent messages, tool-call return values, custom message types (we could use these for contextual messages or for llm short-term/long-term memory, etc.).

# Agent Context Map

An agent context map is defined in an agent's chart definition. The map is essentially a disk partition but for an agent's available context.

A map might be something like

- system prompt
- memory
- conversation
- available tools
- reminders/important context
- user prompt
- LLM response

This map defines the order of context blocks that go down the wire. We might also limit the length of any given section. We might also specify compression strategies for a given section.

# Sub-agents

A sub-agent is just another tool-call, and can be called like any other tool.

## Attached

An attached sub-agent spawns a sub-chart, and the life-cycle of this sub-agent is managed by its parent.

## Detached

A detached sub-agent spawns a new top-level agent and its life-cycle is managed by the application level chart.

# Tool Calls

If an agent chart has tools enabled, then we add a middleware to LLM inference responses.

LLM returns response, it gets filtered through a tool-call middleware.

The middleware behaves differently based on chart-level spec or tool-call specific spec (generated by the LLM).

The middleware is probably just another state... If the middleware is a state, its specific sub-chart is defined by the chart-level spec AND/OR the agent tool-call incantation.

## Sequential, no-fail-on-fail

For sequential, no-fail-on-fail, the chart looks like this:

tool call -> awaiting -> tool call

Each tool-call adds its output to the databag available in the application-context (scoped to the calling llm chart, we'll talk about access permissions in a bit). This includes failed tool-calls. When the results are re-inserted into the session context, the include failed tool-call output.

## Seuqential, fail-on-first-fail

This is essentially a short-cirtcuiting 'AND' application on the tool-calls. The first failed tool call aborts all following calls. All tool output is injected back into the session context stored in the data-bag (again, scoped to the session).

## Parallel, no-fail-on-fail

Parallel calls allow the caller to continue and have the tool-call DONE signal injected into the session context when the tool completes, allowing the LLM agent to access the results on its own time.

As in sequential no-fail-on-fail, but this sub-chart spawns parallel states for each tool-call and they all execute at once. Session context insertion is as above.

## Parallel, fail-on-first-fail

This is harder, and maybe not worth pursuing, but, for the sake of completeness, we include it.

Again, this spawns parallel tool sub-charts (probably re-used generic tool-call chart), but as soon as a failure event bubbles up (done.failure or something like that), un-finished tool calls are aborted. Session insertion mechanics remain the same.

# Inter-Agent Communication

Statecharts are driven by 'Events'. We _do not_ use events to facilitate inter-agent Communication. We use a different method altogether; in this case a pub-sub mail system built on top of a some standard messaging library. Only top-level agents (those expected to have long life-cycles) have inboxes. All agents can send mail to any inbox.

# Heartbeat

Stolen from openclaw; basically cron jobs but they kick off agents and populate the session context with whatever is in HEARTBEAT.md

Heartbeats can be scheduled per top-level agent on any specified interval.

I suppose we should have a rule for 'do not run if currently running' or 'spawn new instance if currently running', something like that.

# Persistence

For all chart instances: play, pause, resume, stop. Should be a feature of the underlying statechart library.

For all chart definitions.

# Chart definitions

Charts hot-loaded from disk, hydrated with env variables, app variables, chart expressions (golang templates), and finally turned into in-memory representations.

